" Education… that meets the needs of the society and enables the building of sustainable communities. "
Xavier University Bhubaneswar (XUB) sees itself as a quality institute delivering quality management education to quality students from the world over. The Xavier University came into being with the Government of Odisha passing the Xavier University Act in June 2013. It inherits the legacy of XIMB (Xavier Institute of Management Bhubaneswar), a premier world class B-School in the country. The identity of Xavier University is distinguished by its philosophy of ‘Inspiring Futures’ by not just walking the well-trodden path but striking out and exploring new paths. There is a clear intent to be the first to respond to the needs of the society and enable the building of sustainable communities that inspire the future of the State and the Country serving as an active agent of change.
The Xavier University stands tall in its mission of inspiring future generation of students aspiring for excellent quality higher education. We offer a wide gamut of programs in Business and Management. The University aims to fulfill its mission by continuing to introduce new programmes to groom visionary, competent, committed, compassionate and value-based leaders. It empowers the students with the knowledge, skills, and long-term vision that leads to innovation, service to society and growth. The University encourages the students to cultivate learning opportunities beyond the classroom, through various Student Forums. The academic programs are designed around a "learning by-doing" model that encourages extensive interaction with all components of the University’s ecosystem which serves as a starting point for evolving leadership philosophy and resilient business practices. Apart from academic activities, the co-curricular activities, sports, cultural and community activities, form important parts of the life of the students.
The University lives up to its vision of faith and spiritual inspiration and strives to build a just and humane society. It stands by the poor in their struggle for justice, it stands for the rights of the displaced persons, it promotes compassion, ethics and care for the environment as path to bring about global peace and sustainable. These excellences we have lived through the years has become an example, a legend for all to imitate and follow. This aligns to our motto -not to benchmark but to be benchmarked.
In its endeavor to take up the tasks which are bold but necessary and which hitherto nobody has taken up, the Xavier City Campus of the Xavier University was inaugurated on July 7, 2014. Presently it hosts eight schools offering Doctoral, Masters and Under-graduate programmes. History was made in October 1987 with the establishment of XIMB (Xavier Institute of Management Bhubaneswar), Xavier University’s flagship management institute which, over the past 30 years has been recognized as a premier Business School in the country. It aspires to lead the country in management education by focusing on research and innovation. Our intellectual capital rankings have been in the top five in the country consistently.
Soon after came a unique rural intervention initiative - Xavier School of Rural Management, committed to our mission of creating social value, meeting the changing needs of rural businesses, government and development organizations. The Xavier School of Human Resources Management is an exclusive course grooming people-sensitive HR leaders equipped to build sustainable organizations and equitable society. With the foundation strongly laid came the courage and strength to a new metamorphosis of a longer lasting higher level change and transformation, leading to the creation of well integrated courses with a common purpose. The University hosts a unique course of study - a School of Sustainability Management, the first of its kind in the Country and among the very few in the World, proof of continuous innovation. The University’s Xavier School of Communications is the first one in the State of Odisha and is equipped as a state-of-the-art high quality media school. The newly instituted Xavier School of Commerce is an educational initiative to provide holistic and integral career oriented undergraduate as well as postgraduate programmes, fostered in a spirit of academic excellence.
Studying at Xavier University is an opportunity to be the light that lights the world and be the fire that lights other fires…that lights other lives.
