VIT was established with the aim of providing quality higher education on par with international standards. It persistently seeks and adopts innovative methods to improve the quality of higher education on a consistent basis.The campus has a cosmopolitan atmosphere with students from all corners of the globe. Experienced and learned teachers are strongly encouraged to nurture the students. The global standards set at VIT in the field of teaching and research spur us on in our relentless pursuit of excellence. In fact, it has become a way of life for us. The highly motivated youngsters on the campus are a constant source of pride. Our Memoranda of Understanding with various international universities are our major strength. They provide for an exchange of students and faculty and encourage joint research projects for the mutual benefit of these universities. Many of our students, who pursue their research projects in foreign universities, bring high quality to their work and esteem to India and have done us proud. With steady steps, we continue our march forward. We look forward to meeting you here at VIT.

History of VIT
The begining VIT as VEC
Open Gallery 
It was established under Section 3 of the University Grants Commission (UGC) Act, 1956, and was founded in 1984 as a self-financing institution called the Vellore Engineering College. The Union Ministry of Human Resources Development conferred University status on Vellore Engineering College in 2001. The University is headed by its founder and Chancellor, Dr. G. Viswanathan, a former Parliamentarian and Minister in the Tamil Nadu Government. In recognition of his service to India in offering world class education, he was conferred an honorary doctorate by the West Virginia University, USA. Sankar Viswanathan, Sekar Viswanathan and G.V. Selvam are the Vice-Presidents; Dr. Anand A. Samuel is the Vice-Chancellor and Dr. V. Raju and Dr. S. Narayanan are the Pro-Vice-Chancellors.

Our Vision
We at VIT will impart futuristic technical education and instil high patterns of discipline through our dedicated staff, who shall set global standards, making our students technologically superior and ethically strong, who in turn shall improve the quality of life of the human race.

Our Mission
Our mission is to educate students from all over India, including those from the local and rural areas, and from other countries, so they become enlightened individuals, improving the living standards of their families, industry and society. We will provide individual attention, world-class quality education and take care of character building.

Quick Facts
Over 2,23,000 appeared for the VIT Engineering Entrance Examination (VITEEE) in 2017
The institution offers 36 Undergraduate, 31 Post graduate, 4 Integrated and 3 Research Programmes.
NAAC has re-accredited VIT with an 'A' grade.
A 360-acre eco-friendly campus with over 50.83 lakh sq.ft. built-up space at Vellore.
A 170 acre eco-friendly second campus at Chennai.
Over 35,000 students, with nearly 1/3rd of them women
Students from 60 countries as well as from every state in India
Over 1400 faculty and 1413 staff.
VIT has been accredited by TCS, Wipro and Cognizant for academic collaboration and placements.
Entered the Limca Book of Records for Campus Recruitment.